what is blackberry?

BlackBerry is a brand of smartphones, tablets, and services originally designed and marketed by Canadian company BlackBerry Limited. Beginning in 2016, BlackBerry Limited licensed third party companies to design, manufacture, and market smartphones under the BlackBerry brand. blackberry, usually prickly fruit-bearing bush of the genus Rubus of the rose family (Rosaceae), known for its dark edible fruits. Native chiefly to north temperate regions, wild blackberries are particularly abundant in eastern North America and on the Pacific coast of that continent and are cultivated in many areas of North America and Europe. Blackberries are a fairly good source of iron, vitamin C, and antioxidants and are generally eaten fresh, in preserves, or in baked goods such as cobblers and pies.

Closely related to raspberries (also in the Rubus genus), blackberry plants have biennial canes (stems) covered with prickles and grow erect, semierect, or with trailing stems. The compound leaves usually feature three or five oval, coarsely toothed, stalked leaflets, many of which persist through the winter. Borne on terminal clusters, the flowers are white, pink, or red and produce black or red-purple fruits. Though commonly called berries, the fruits of Rubus species are technically aggregates of drupelets. Unlike the hollow fruits of raspberries, the drupelets of blackberries remain attached to a juicy white core, thus distinguishing the two.

There are tens of thousands of blackberry hybrids and segregates of various types, the thornless blackberry being a modern development. Several species, notably the cutleaf, or evergreen, blackberry (R. laciniatus) and the Himalayan blackberry (R. armeniacus), are invasive species that spread rapidly by animal-mediated seed dispersal and vegetative reproduction. At least two South American Rubus species are listed as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Rosaceae, the rose family of flowering plants (order Rosales), composed of some 2,500 species in more than 90 genera. The family is primarily found in the north temperate zone and occurs in a wide variety of habitats. A number of species are of economic importance as food crops, including apples, almonds, cherries, pears, raspberries, and strawberries; some, such as the rose, are grown as ornamentals. Members of Rosaceae are generally woody plants, mostly shrubs or small to medium-size trees, some of which are armed with thorns, spines, or 

prickles to discourage herbivores. The genus Rubus (e.g., blackberries and raspberries) chiefly contains arching shrubs or scramblers of irregular, often tangled appearance. Herbaceous perennials are found in several genera, most notably strawberries (Fragaria), cinquefoil (Potentilla), avens (Geum), and goatsbeard (Aruncus). Most species in the family have alternate leaves, and small leaflike structures called stipules are routinely present at the base of the leaf stalks. The bisexual flowers vary from small to large and range from white to various shades of yellow, pink, orange, lavender, or red. Typically flat or shallowly cup-shaped, the flowers are radially symmetric and feature flower parts in multiples of five or four. The sepals and petals are almost always free from each other, and many species bear a characteristic hypanthium, or floral cup, from whose rim the sepals, petals, and stamens arise. The hypanthium is often lined with nectar-producing tissue. Most species are insect pollinated and produce 

a variety of fruit. In fact, the family is divided into four subfamilies based primarily on fruits: Spiraeoideae (Spirea subfamily), wiYou may hear people mention a BlackBerry and suspect they're not talking about the fruit. Chances are, they're talking about a BlackBerry smartphone.

The BlackBerry is a smartphone made by the Canadian company BlackBerry Limited (formerly Research In Motion). BlackBerry phones are known for their email handling and security features and are often thought of as business-centric devices, despite BlackBerry's efforts to join the consumer market.Research in Motion (RIM) released the BlackBerry 850 pager in 1999. BlackBerry handhelds started out as data-only devices; they could not be used to make phone calls. Early models were two-way pagers with full QWERTY keyboards. They were used primarily by business people to send messages back and forth wirelessly.

RIM soon added email capabilities to its BlackBerry devices, which became popular among lawyers and other corporate users. Early BlackBerry email devices featured full QWERTY keyboards and monochrome screens but still lacked phone features.

The BlackBerry 5810, which was launched in 2002, was the first BlackBerry to add phone functionality. It looked like RIM's data-only devices, retaining the same squat shape, QWERTY keyboard, and monochrome screen. It required a headset and microphone to make voice calls, as the speaker was not built in.

The BlackBerry 6000 series, also launched in 2002, was the first to feature integrated phone functionality, meaning that users did not need an external headset to make calls. The 7000 series added color screens and saw the debut of the SureType keyboard, the modified QWERTY format with two letters on most keys, which allowed for smaller phones.th follicles (dry fruits that open on one side); Rosoideae (rose subfamily), with achenes (dry fruits that do not open) or, in Rubus, drupelets (small drupes [fleshy stone fruits]); Amygdaloideae (plum subfamily), with drupes; and Maloideae (apple subfamily), with pomes (fruits in which the hypanthium becomes fleshy).