What is dell?

The company, first named PC’s Limited, was founded in 1984 by American Michael Dell, who was then a student at the University of Texas in Austin. Initially running the business from a dormitory room, Dell started out providing customized upgrades for PCs. The venture proved profitable, and Dell dropped out of college that same year to begin building PCs. In 1985 the company released the Turbo PC, the first computer featuring Dell’s own design. Founded on the premise of creating and selling custom-built PCs directly to consumers, the company initially sold its products through advertisements and mail-order catalogs. By avoiding the costs associated with traditional retail markets, Dell was able to offer high-quality PCs at competitive prices. Dell emphasized customer support, sending technicians to service PCs and implementing a policy of risk-free returns. This business model proved successful, and the company quickly grew, expanding into international markets. The company, renamed Dell Computer Corporation, 

went public in 1988. Dell released its first notebook computer, the 316LT, in 1989. The following years were marked by advancements in Dell’s mobile technology. In 1991 Dell’s first colour notebook computer went on sale, and in 1994 Dell was the first company to offer long-lasting lithium-ion batteries. In 1996 Dell began selling PCs online and also used the Internet for customer support. Online sales helped Dell overtake the Compaq Computer Corporation in 1999 as the largest seller of PCs in the United States.

In the early 21st century Dell expanded its product line to include televisions, digital cameras, and a variety of computer-related products. In 2003 the company was renamed Dell Inc. to signify a move into the broader consumer electronics market. Dell’s dominance in the market began to falter, however, and the company returned to private ownership in 2013, when Michael Dell and the private equity firm Silver Lake Partners purchased it for $25 billion. In 2016 the company and an investment firm acquired EMC, an American corporation that specialized in data storage. The merger, valued at approximately $60 billion, was the largest technology deal at the time.

Dell Technologies, Inc. is a holding company, which engages in the provision of information technology hardware, software, and service solutions through its subsidiaries. It operates through the following segments: Infrastructure Solutions Group (ISG), Client Solutions Group (CSG), and VMware. The ISG segment includes servers, networking, and storage, as well as services and third-party software and peripherals that are closely tied to the sale of ISG hardware. The CSG segment consists of sales to commercial and consumer customers of desktops, thin client products, and notebooks. The VMware segment provides compute, cloud management, networking and security, storage and availability, and other end-user computing offerings. The company was founded by Michael Saul Dell in 1984 and is headquartered in Round Rock, TX. At the time, the PC industry was dominated by such large firms as IBM, while smaller, lesser known mail-order firms sold IBM clones at a steep discount. Dell used low-cost direct marketing to unders

ell the better known computers being sold through such high-overhead dealer networks. Dell placed ads in computer magazines, gearing his merchandise to buyers who were sophisticated enough to recognize high-quality merchandise at low prices. Customers placed orders to Dell by dialing a toll-free number. As a result of these methods, Dell's computers became the top brand name in the direct-mail market. The Tandy team soon helped raise gross margins to 31 percent, up from 23 percent a year earlier. Rather than merely undercutting the prices of competitors, they set prices in relation to the firm's costs. The new marketing department soon ran into trouble with Michael Dell, however. Battles erupted over advertising budgets and the number of salespeople required for corporations and resellers. While Dell believed that the new team did not understand direct selling and was trying to create a traditional marketing department with an overly large sales force, the Tandy group alleged that Dell lacked the patience to 
wait for the sales force to pay off. By early 1988, most of the Tandy group had resigned or been forced out. The firm faced several challenges, however. Announcing their own clone of IBM's new PS/2 computer system well before it was actually ready, Dell later had trouble reproducing important aspects of the PS/2's architecture, and the computers were delayed significantly, embarrassing the young company. Furthermore, Dell faced competition from several Japanese manufacturers, which were offering IBM clones at low prices. Further, having had trouble meeting demand, Dell used money raised from its stock offering to expand capacity and warehouse space, leaving the company with little cash. When it overestimated demand during the fourth quarter of 1988, the firm suddenly had no cash and warehouses full of unsold computers.

Dell responded to the increasing competition by increasing the level of technical sophistication in its computers. Half of its 1988 sales came from PCs using the Intel Corporation's 80386 microprocessor, the most powerful PC chip at the time, and the company began producing file servers using the sophisticated Unix operating system. Dell also hired computer scientist Glenn Henry away from IBM to work on product development. Scrapping the company's first attempts at cloning IBM's PS/2, Henry initiated new plans for producing clones. Henry built Dell's research and development staff from almost nothing to 150 engineers, who began working on ways to combine the function of several chips onto one chip. When Intel released its 486 microprocessor, Dell began speeding to market the computers that could use it. Another of Henry's goals was high-quality graphics, which required better monitors and special circuit boards. By mid-1989 Dell had finished initial attempts at graphics hardware, giving it inroads into the hi
gher end of the PC market. Dell considered itself as much a marketing company as a hardware company, and its sales staff played an important role in its successes. Dell's sales personnel trained for six weeks or more before taking their seats at the phonebanks, and, along with their managers, they held weekly meetings to discuss customer complaints and possible solutions. In addition to fielding questions and taking orders, sales staff were trained to promote products. They helped buyers customize orders, selling them more memory or built-in modems. Orders were then sent to Dell's nearby factory where they were filled within five days. The telemarketing system also allowed Dell to compile information on its customers, helping the firm spot opportunities and mistakes far more quickly than most other PC companies. As the PC wars continued, Compaq, which had been a higher priced manufacturer stressing its quality engineering, repositioned itself to take on Dell, releasing a low-end PC priced at just $899 and imp
roving its customer services. The new competition affected Dell's margins, forcing it to cut its computer prices by up to $1,400 to keep its market share. Dell could afford such steep price cuts because its operating costs were only 18 percent of revenues, compared with Compaq's 36 percent. The competition also forced Dell away from its attempts to stress its engineering. Dell executives began speaking of computers as consumer products similar to appliances, downplaying the importance of technology. Reflecting this increased stress on marketing, Dell began selling a catalogue of computer peripherals and software made by other companies; it soon expanded into fax machines and compact discs. Dell's database, containing information on the buying habits of more than 750,000 of its customers, was instrumental in this effort.