What is discord?

Discord is a VoIP, instant messaging and digital distribution platform. Users communicate with voice calls, video calls, text messaging, media and files in private chats or as part of communities called "servers". Servers are a collection of persistent chat rooms and voice chat channels. Discord, a popular group-chatting app, was originally made to give gamers a place to build communities and talk.

But since its launch in 2015, it has branched out to include communities from all over the internet, ranging from writers to artists to K-Pop stans. It has boomed in popularity during the pandemic, as more people have worked, played games, and socialized online, and the platform says it now has more than 140 million active monthly users.

In the news: Microsoft is reportedly in talks to acquire Discord for more than $10 billion.

Here's a guide to Discord, one of the most popular chatting apps around today, which is available for Mac, PC, iPhone, and Android devices.

Discord, explained

At a basic level, Discord is built to allow members to message each other. Each community is called a "server." If you're familiar with Slack, you can think of it as a less formal version of that app. Servers are filled with text channels (where you can type to talk to other people) and voice channels (where you can voice-chat with others). You can also share videos, images, internet links, music, and more.

Each server usually has multiple channels, each of which is dedicated to a different topic or has different rules.

For example, you might have one channel to talk about a game, and another for general chatting, and another for pictures of cats. The possibilities are endless.

Starting your own server is free, as is joining other servers.

There are thousands of different Discord servers, each one dedicated to a different topic. If you have an interest in something, there's a good chance you can find a Discord server for it.

This is especially true for video games, which make up the bulk of Discord's most popular servers. Much like other chatting apps, Discord allows you to directly message other users. When you do this, you can voice- or video-chat with them.

Discord can also be connected to other apps, like YouTube and Spotify. And there are both desktop and mobile versions of the platform, so you can use it no matter which device you're using - even while you're gaming.

You also have the option to upgrade to Discord Nitro, which includes features like higher video quality, server boosting, a higher upload limit, enhanced quality live streaming, and a custom Discord. Video games and the internet go together like Doritos and Mountain Dew. With the internet, you don’t need to seek the bustling crowds of an arcade or wrangle friends together for gaming on the couch. They can enjoy cooperating with or competing against other people all over the world. Granted, online multiplayer isn’t always a pleasant experience, especially when it comes to communication. Listening to random faraway strangers curse at you can be enough to make you want to burn your headset. However, experiences such as conducting epic MMO raids or coordinating tactics with your teammates in shooters just weren’t possible in the era before online chat.

With over a quarter of a billion users, Discord is one of the most popular ways gamers communicate online. Discord lets friends communicate directly via voice, video, or text, and join servers where larger communities can interact together.

Gaming is definitely Discord’s focus, at one point the service even gave free away PC games to paid subscribers before realizing it couldn’t beat Steam. However, any online community can take advantage of the features Discord offers. More on its other uses in a bit. There are plenty of ways to communicate while gaming online, but many of them are tied to their specific consoles or platforms. Discord succeeds because it is platform agnostic. You can integrate it with your Xbox account, and there are unofficial ways to connect it to your PlayStation account, as well. However, Discord is not locked down to any one system, unlike Xbox Live and PlayStation Network. Not being tethered to a game console also strengthens Discord's argument for non-gaming uses such as talking to family or classmates.

Joining Discord is as easy as using the service on your desktop browser or downloading the free app available for Android, iOS, Linux, macOS, and Windows. From there you join a server by searching for one, accepting an invite, or creating your own. A server is made up of channels via which server members can communicate with each other through text, voice, or video options, such as sharing their computer screens. The video chat may make it an acce to Zoom Meetings.

