What is flipkart?

On May 9, 2018, Walmart announced that it bought a majority stake of about 77 per cent in Flipkart, making it the largest online e-commerce acquisition in the world and giving the U.S.-based retail goliath a key stake in one of the world’s largest and fastest-growing online retail markets and delivering a blow to rival Amazon.

Alphabet, the parent company of Google, is also expected to purchase a small stake in Flipkart, reportedly about ten per cent or so.

The news confirms months of speculation that Walmart was in talks to buy Flipkart, though both companies remained mum on any possible talks. Flipkart is India’s largest online commerce company but has been fighting off Jeff Bezos’s Amazon since its entry and subsequent aggression expansion into the Indian e-commerce market back in 2013.

Amazon reportedly tried to scuttle the Walmart-Flipkart deal by trying to negotiate its own majority stake purchase of the Indian company but was ultimately unsuccessful. Walmart’s acquisition of Flipkart now means that it gains a key foothold in a country where the number of online shoppers is expected to skyrocket from 60 million in 2016 to about 475 million in 2026.

The recent purchase of Flipkart by Walmart will likely have major repercussions for the fast-growing Indian e-commerce market and rival Amazon alike.

The deal now pits two of the largest and most influential retail companies in the United States in a titanic showdown to control one of the world’s largest online commerce markets that’s also expected to see a surge in new customers in the coming years. The battle will likely have positive benefits for Indian consumers, spurring competitive prices and a larger variety of online products to choose from, especially considering Walmart’s longtime strategy of bringing mass quantities of low-priced products to consumers.

It will also likely provide an economic boost for the Indian economy, as Amazon’s previous commitment alongside Flipkart’s expected growth will in all likelihood create new jobs, spur consumer demand and create a growing supply chain infrastructure in the country.

The coming war between the online retail giants will also likely negatively impact smaller competitors by squeezing them out of the market. Online independent sellers on Flipkart have also expressed fear that Walmart could effectively cannibalize the Flipkart market by flooding it with its own brand of products at ultra-competitive prices, undercutting them and forcing them from the online retail market. Flipkart, which has redefined shopping in India, works on a B2C (business to consumer model). Flipkart started off with a direct-to-consumer model selling books and some other products, before turning to a marketplace model which connect sellers and buyers and expanding its catalogue. Today, it sells everything from smartphones to clothes to furniture refrigerators to FMCG goods — and yes, books too.

Flipkart claims to have lakhs of sellers on board from across India who list their products in over 80 categories. The average consumer might not care who the seller is and has a relationship with Flipkart, whereas the seller who may not have reached the customer at all can now do so thanks to Flipkart’s platform. To facilitate this transaction and fulfil the order, Flipkart charges a varying percentage as a commission fee from the seller. In 2016, Flipkart acquired a fintech company called FxMart and released a payments service called PhonePe. PhonePe offers a UPI-based payments app as well as support for billing, recharges, ecommerce and other online services. As per the UPI data released for August 2019, PhonePe was the leading app for UPI payments in India.

Post the acquisitions by Walmart last year, Flipkart has increasingly turned to hybrid or omnichannel sales model. It recently opened a FurniSure experience store to help customers touch and feel the furniture products before making the purchase.

Besides ecommerce, Flipkart has recently acquired a food retail license, which it will use to run its fresh, locally-produced food retail business under the name FarmerMart. It’s also selling groceries online through Flipkart SuperMart in some cities. 