what is huawei?

Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. is a Chinese multinational technology company headquartered in Shenzhen, Guangdong. It designs, develops, and sells telecommunications equipment and consumer electronics. The company was founded in 1987 by Ren Zhengfei, a former Deputy Regimental Chief in the People's Liberation Army. The Chinese telecommunications company has been manufacturing mobile phones since 1997. It is also the largest telecom infrastructure maker in the world. The company also makes Android smartphones and tablets. Recently it has stepped into the smartwatch market with an Android Wear based device. It is another one of the big smartphone manufacturers from China. Huawei's latest mobile launch is the Nova Y60. The mobile was launched in 26th August 2021. The phone comes with a 6.60-inch display with a resolution of 720 pixels by 1600 pixels.

It comes with 4GB of RAM. The phone packs 64GB of internal storage that can be expanded up to 512GB via a microSD card. As far as the cameras are concerned, the Huawei Nova Y60 packs a 13-megapixel (f/1.8) + 5-megapixel (f/2.2) + 2-megapixel (f/2.4) primary camera on the rear and a 8-megapixel front shooter for selfies.

The Huawei Nova Y60 runs Android 11 and is powered by a 5000mAh. It measures 165.26 x 76.02 x 9.20 (height x width x thickness) and weigh 185.00 grams.

The Huawei Nova Y60 is a dual SIM (GSM and GSM) mobile that accepts Nano-SIM and Nano-SIM. Connectivity options include Wi-Fi, GPS, Bluetooth, USB Type-C and Active 4G on both SIM cards. Sensors on the phone include Fingerprint sensor, Proximity sensor, Ambient light sensor and Gyroscope. In the midst of an ongoing trade war between China and the United States, Huawei was restricted from doing commerce with U.S. companies due to alleged previous willful violations of U.S. sanctions against Iran. On 29 June 2019, U.S. President Donald Trump reached an agreement to resume trade talks with China and announced that he would ease the aforementioned sanctions on Huawei. Huawei cut 600 jobs at its Santa Clara research center in June, and in December 2019 founder Ren Zhengfei said it was moving the center to Canada because the restrictions would block them from interacting with US employees. On 17 November 2020, according to technology blog Engadget, Huawei agreed to sell the Honor brand to Shenzen Zhixin New 

Informtion Technology to "ensure its survival", after the US sanctions against them. On July 23, 2021, Huawei reportedly hired Tony Podesta as a consultant and lobbyist, with a goal of nurturing the company's relationship with the Biden administration. Although successful internationally, Huawei has faced difficulties in some markets, due to claims of undue state support, links to the People's Liberation Army, and cybersecurity concerns—primarily from the United States government—that Huawei's infrastructure equipment may enable surveillance by the Chinese government. With the development of 5G wireless networks, there have been calls from the U.S. and its allies to not do any kind of business with Huawei or other Chinese telecommunications companies such as ZTE. Huawei has argued that its products posed "no greater cybersecurity risk" than those of any other vendor and that there is no evidence of the U.S. espionage claims. Questions regarding Huawei's ownership and control as well as concerns regarding the 
extent oThe company's first major breakthrough came in 1993 when it launched its C&C08 program controlled telephone switch. It was by far the most powerful switch available in China at the time. By initially deploying in small cities and rural areas and placing emphasis on service and customizability, the company gained market share and made its way into the mainstream marketf state support also remain. Huawei has also been accused of assisting in the surveillance and mass detention of Uyghurs in the Xinjiang re-education camps, which have resulted in sanctions by the United States Department of State. Huawei tested facial recognition AI capable of recognizing ethnicity-specific features to alert government authorities to members of the ethnic group.