What is instagram?

With over a billion registered accounts, Instagram, which was bought by Facebook in 2012, has become a part of daily life. It seems like everyone is on Instagram nowadays, from small businesses to big ones, news organizations to cultural institutions, celebrities, photographers, and musicians, and not to mention the cottage industry of influencers that have come in its wake. To start using Instagram, you'll need to download the app and sign up for an account. It's available for free on iOS, Android, and Windows devices. While there isn't an app fully optimized for iPads, you can still enjoy the full IG experience on your iPad by changing your App Store settings to find the app.

Upon opening the app for the first time, you'll be prompted to create a new account, or log in with your Facebook account. If you choose to make a new account, the process is straightforward: You'll be asked for your phone number or email address, full name, desired username, and password.

Once you create an account, it's worth noting that you can create and switch between multiple Instagram accounts without logging out - a very useful feature if you wish to, say, run separate accounts for personal and professional use.

Even though Instagram is designed primarily for smartphones, the desktop experience - once very limited - has steadily improved over the years. Today, you can get on Instagram from your computer and use a web browser to edit your profile, view your feed, like and comment on posts, and send and receive direct messages.

The only thing you can't do on your computer? Post photos and videos. Not officially, anyway. If you're wondering how to post photos and videos from your computer, there's a workaround in your browser settings.When you first set up your Instagram account, you're going to want to set up your profile. Your profile page is a hub for all your photos and videos, where you can keep track of who you're following and who's following you. It's also where you can access your settings.

Profile pages are often the first thing people visit, so it's best to keep your username, profile picture, and bio up to date. Your profile picture is the icon that appears with your username all over the platform, while your bio is a space to offer a brief description of yourself or your brand. You can also add a link to your website, if applicable. Keeping up with others on Instagram means making sure you're getting the right notifications, when you want them. The platform gives you the power to choose what push notifications it sends to your device.

For example, perhaps you want to receive a notification when you get a new follower, or when someone comments on your post. Or maybe you're feeling inundated with pings, and you want them to turn notifications off completely.

Now that you have the app downloaded, and your profile set up, it's time to start sharing. Like other social media networks, Instagram is what you make it. For most people, checking Instagram is equal parts voyeurism and self-expression. For the entrepreneurial set, like business owners, brands, and influencers, Instagram is an indispensable marketing tool with unmatched reach.

But going back to basics, Instagram works off a simple premise: You follow accounts that interest you. In turn, people follow you. People can "like" and comment on your posts, and you can do the same to their posts. Whether you maintain a low profile or amass a following, how active you are is entirely up to you. To share a photo or video on Instagram, tap the large plus button, where you can select photos or videos from your phone's camera roll to post. Instagram allows you to to select up to 10 photos and videos to post at once.

For every post, you can choose to apply a filter, which, depending on who you ask, is essential to the Instagram experience. Filters make it easy to edit shots with different visual pre-set overlays. For example, some filters, like "Mayfair," give everything a pink hue; others, like "Willow," turn everything black-and-white.

Once your post is to your liking and ready to go, there are a few more optional things you can do before you hit the "share" button:

Add a caption: Captions are always a good idea. You can use words, emojis, or hashtags. Just like in comments, you can also "mention" friends by placing "@" in front of their username. Keep in mind you can edit captions at any time - or delete them, if need be in the future.

Tag people: Instagram allows you to "tag" someone in your photos. When you tag someone, they'll get a notification in their activity feed.

Add location: Location tags let others know where your photo was taken. Clicking on a location tag brings you to its corresponding location feed, where you can peruse other public posts.

Also post to other social accounts: Instagram also gives you the ability to publish a post to other social accounts at the same time. By linking accounts, you can cross-post to Facebook, Twitter, and Tumblr.