what is levis?

Walter A. Haas, (born May 11, 1889, San Francisco, Calif., U.S.—died Dec. 7, 1979, San Francisco), American business executive credited with saving the foundering Levi Strauss & Co., the major manufacturer of “blue jean” denim pants. Haas’s efforts after World War II laid the groundwork for the company’s dramatic growth during the blue-jean boom of the 1960s and ’70s.

Haas’s association with Levi Strauss & Co. began in 1914 with his marriage to Elise Stern, whose father Jacob was one of four nephews who had inherited the company from their uncle Levi Strauss, the founder. The company was doing poorly, and the nephews were considering liquidation, but Haas urged otherwise and within two years after joining the firm in 1919 had managed to reverse its fortunes. In 1928 he became president, a post he was to retain until 1955.

Haas’s most significant move came in 1946, when he decided to get Levi Strauss out of the wholesale dry-goods business, which then accounted for 75 percent of the company’s $8 million annual sales, and concentrate instead on manufacturing. Haas also expanded the company’s distribution, diversified its product line, and aimed more products at young people. By the time of his death sales exceeded $2 billion annually. Haas’s family continued to control Levi Strauss, with his sons Walter A., Jr., and Peter serving as chairman and president, respectively.

During the 1980s, because of increasing competition and financial difficulties, Levi Strauss closed nearly 60 of its U.S. manufacturing plants and began shifting production overseas. In 1990 a class-action lawsuit against the company alleged that it had closed its plant in San Antonio, Texas, and relocated it to Costa Rica to avoid paying pension, disability, and other benefits to its workers; the case was eventually dismissed. The last two U.S. manufacturing plants were closed in 2004. However, in the following decade some production of Levi Strauss items returned to the United States.

In 1991 an investigation revealed that some products that Levi Strauss had represented as made in the United States were actually manufactured in the Northern Mariana Islands (a U.S. commonwealth) by Chinese labourers working in illegal sweatshop conditions. The subcontractor managing the island factories was fined nearly $10 million by the U.S. government, and Levi Strauss subsequently took steps to improve labour standards and inspection practices for its offshore suppliers.

In 1996 Levi’s Vintage Clothing (LVC)—a line of reproductions of clothing items from the Levi Strauss Archives—was introduced worldwide. The company later launched (2003) the Signature by Levi Strauss & Co. brand, a more affordable line of jeans and casual wear, and in 2007 Levi Strauss partnered with the French company ModeLabs Group to develop a series of Levi’s-branded mobile telephones.

Despite these moves, sales stagnated, and in 2011 Levi Strauss hired Chip Bergh as CEO. He was credited with turning the company around as he instituted various changes, such as modernizing its e-commerce division and expanding overseas markets. In March 2019 Levi Strauss went public again, and its IPO raised more than $620 million.