what is messenger?

Users simply download the app to their mobile/tablet device; the app can also be used on desktop. Users have the option of setting up Messenger using their Facebook account or with their telephone number (similar to Whatsapp, Viber, ooVoo etc.) If you choose to set-up an account with your Facebook profile, Messenger takes information from your Facebook profile to set up your Messenger profile. This information includes friends list, profile picture, etc. The app can sync with your phone contacts as well as with your current friend list on Facebook. With all other similar messaging apps, there are some risks and things to watch out for. Some of the more common risks include cyberbullying, experiencing or sharing inappropriate content and chatting with strangers. To help avoid these problems, the same rules should apply to all online interactions for young people; only share data with those who you trust in real life, think before you click and report any inappropriate data or messages to a trusted adult. There 
are some other risks more specific to the Messenger app which parents should be also be aware of. When set up with a Facebook account, the Messenger app can sync with all of your phone book contacts in addition to Facebook friends. If you are concerned about who might be in your child’s contacts list or would prefer to limit who your child’s contacts to only Facebook friends, this can be done by skipping the sync with contacts option when downloading the app or turning it off in the settings. Go to Settings > People > Turn Synced Contacts off.

Another privacy setting parents should be aware of is ‘Who can contact me’. By default this Facebook setting is set to ‘basic filtering’ – which means friends and people you may know can contact you on Facebook and on Messenger. To avoid risk of contact from someone your child may not know, it is recommended that this setting be switched to strict filtering (only friends can send messages to the account). This only applies when a user has set up a Messenger account using Facebook. To limit who can contact your child. Facebook Messenger is an instant messaging feature built into Facebook. Messenger originally launched in 2011 and its success gave rise to a dedicated application and website that emerged in 2014. The application and website is an instant messaging service that connects to the Facebook database and has replaced the in-app Facebook messaging service. It allows Facebook users to connect with each other and send instant messages, emoji, photos, videos, and perform other light tasks.

With a recent update you can now send money to friends within Facebook Messenger. You can get the weather and place product orders with the help of Facebook Bots, and you can also get a quick ride with the integration of Uber and Lyft. Using the Facebook Messenger Application is a bit different from the website version. When you first launch the application you will be presented with a home screen that shows your contacts, messages, and favorite threads. Along the bottom of the application screen is a navigation bar that includes five icons/buttons. Using the new bot (short for robot) feature is easy. Simply open a new message thread and perform a search for the bot of your choice or add the link from their website.

For example, if you choose Burger King, you can send a message that you are hungry and the bot will take your order. There are bots for companies like 1-800-flowers, CNN, eBay, Expedia, and many more with additional options added daily. Simply follow the conversation to complete your task. You can also get information on the stock market, view the weather, plan vacations, and chat with customer support. A messenger app is any app that enables a private messaging function between two or more people. With more and more messenger apps popping up every day, this type of technology is quickly becoming the most popular way to send text-based messages, replacing SMS and MMS as the preference of most consumers.

Messenger apps are now commonplace, with many brands employing the technology to connect their customers with customer service agents.

The technology behind messaging apps has been in widespread use since the early 90s, but it really rose in popularity in the early 2000s with the advent of messaging apps like AOL Messenger. By 2013, the number of messages being sent via these apps surpassed that of SMS messages.

Now, messaging apps attract billions of users, and they’re in use all over the world. WhatsApp currently has 1.6 billion users, while Facebook messenger has 1.3 billion and popular messaging platform WeChat has 1.1 billion users. Messenger apps are increasingly used in customer service to enable customers to communicate with brands easily about service issues and product questions. Within Facebook Messenger, live chat, or in-app messaging, customers can reach out to brands for immediate response. 

Conversations that occur within messenger apps are dynamic and two-way, allowing for contextual conversation while the user is engaged with the app. They’re a highly effective and engaging way of interacting with customers and raising customer satisfaction scores. In fact, brands that use messenger apps for customer service see an average CSAT of 4.1, which is 35% higher than the average CSAT for email conversations.

Brands can also employ automation and AI so that QuickSearch Bots enable a quick average time to first response and an ideal resolution time. In a time when customers demand quick answers and personalized experiences, messenger apps enable both while saving organizations money. Building mobile messaging right into your app emulates a messenger app and helps you retain users who prefer to communicate this way. Helpshift’s in-app messaging technology allows you to provide on-demand customer support right from within your mobile experience, with native experiences for iOS and Android, mobile-optimized search features, and offline FAQs.

Helpshift’s SDK also collects metadata to give you the context you need to resolve issues faster. For instance, Helpshift’s SDK collects information such as app version, user profile attributes, and user location.

In-app messaging with Helpshift allows customers to shoot off a message as soon as an issue arises or a thought comes to mind, right within the app. And unlike with the phone or live web chat, an agent doesn’t have to be “on the line” for the customer to launch into the conversation. In fact, asynchronous messaging allows the customer to go about their day while they wait for the response. 