what is nokia?

Nokia Corporation is a Finnish multinational telecommunications, information technology, and consumer electronics company, founded in 1865. Nokia's main headquarters are in Espoo, Finland, in the greater Helsinki metropolitan area, but the company's actual roots are in the Tampere region of Pirkanmaa. Nokia is a Finnish company founded in 1865 as a maker of pulp and paper. The company branched into rubber and cable businesses over the years, and later formed a merged entity, Nokia Corporation, in 1967. Though the company operated in various industries initially, it focused on the telecommunication infrastructure business, technology development, telecom equipment and licensing from mid-90s. Since then, the company has been one the major contributors in the field of mobile phone telephony industry.
 
Being one of the early companies to experiment and explore the telecommunication networks, the Finnish company forayed into the cellular network industry in the late 1970s. The firm helped design the world’s first international cellular network system — Nordic Mobile Telephone (NMT) network — that connected the four Scandinavian countries. In 1982, Nokia bought Finnish mobile phone company Mobira, which later helped formulate the Nokia Mobile Phones division, a new business vertical for the company.
 
In 1992, Nokia turned into a telecom-oriented company and launched its first commercially available GSM mobile phone, the Nokia 1011. In October 1998, Nokia toppled Motorola to become the best-selling smartphone brand. The same year, Nokia co-founded Symbian Ltd to create a new operating system for hand-held devices and smart mobile phones. The company launched the Symbian OS-based Nokia 9210 Communicator in 2001. It later designed the Symbian Series 60 platform, which was introduced in the company’s first camera phone, the Nokia 7650. 
 
Until 2009, the company was a market leader in the mobile phone segment. However, the company’s mobile phone division witnessed a sharp downfall after Google introduced the Android OS and Apple the iPhone with iOS. In 2011, the company sold its mobile phone division to Microsoft, which introduced Windows Phone 7 as the primary operating system on Nokia-branded smartphones. The Nokia-Microsoft deal also failed to bring the brand its lost glory. By 2014, Nokia's global brand value fell to 98th from 5th in 2009.
 
In 2016, Microsoft Mobile sold its Nokia-branded feature phone business to HMD Global, a Finnish start-up founded by former Nokia executive Jean-Francois Baril. Subsequently, Nokia made a long-term licensing deal with HMD to exclusively manufacture Nokia-branded phones and tablets outside Japan. The deal also granted HMD the right to essential patents and the feature phone software. The Nokia Corporation is a Finnish multinational communications and information technology corporation that is headquartered in Espoo, Finland. Its principal products are mobile telephones and portable IT devices. It also offers Internet services including applications, games, music, media and messaging, and free-of-charge digital map information and navigation services through its wholly owned subsidiary Navteq. Nokia has a joint venture with Siemens, Nokia Siemens Networks, which provides telecommunications network equipment and services. Nokia has around 101,982 employees across 120 countries, sales in more than 150 countries a
nd annual revenues of around €30 billion. It is the world's second-largest mobile phone maker by 2012 unit sales, with a global market share of 22.5 in the first quarter of that year. Nokia is a public limited-liability company listed on the Helsinki Stock Exchange and New York Stock Exchange. It is the world's 143rd-largest company measured by 2011 revenues according to the Fortune Global 500. Nokia was the world's largest vendor of mobile phones from 1998 to 2012. However, over the past five years it has suffered a declining market share as a result of the growing use of touchscreen smartphones from other vendors - principally the Apple iPhone and devices running on Google's Android operating system - in which Nokia did not take enough advantage of. As a result, its share price had fallen from a high of US$40 in late 2007 to under US$2 in mid-2012. In a bid to recover, Nokia announced a strategic partnership with Microsoft in February 2011, as part of which all Nokia smartphones will incorporate Microsoft'

s Windows Phone operating system, replacing Symbian. Nokia's current flagship product is the Nokia Lumia 920 and its successors, the 925 and the 928.