What is Ola?

Ola needs no introduction. The first Indian cab aggregator company, Ola has made availing cab services a smooth experience. Owned by ANI Technologies Pvt. Ltd. and formerly known as OlaCabs, Ola was launched in December 2010 by two IIT Bombay graduates. Ola bridges the gap between cab owners and commuters.

Instead of buying and renting out its own cars, Ola partners with a number of taxi drivers and owners and adds a touch of modern technology to the whole setup. This allows people to book cabs at a short notice through Ola's app. Ola is India’s homegrown ride-hailing app with almost 60% market share (as of 2014) in India. It has users across 100 cities of India and employs 15 lakh driver-partners.

Driven by a hyper-local approach, Ola is committed to its mission of building mobility for a billion people. Staying in line with its mission, Ola has also ventured into auto and bike booking services. Ola also started off a bicycle sharing service called 'Ola Pedal' in 2017 to facilitate last mile connectivity. Ola has partnered with Siemens to build its upcoming electric vehicle manufacturing facility. This announcement comes when OLA has an MoU with the government of Tamil Nadu to invest around INR 2,400 Cr towards building this facility.

It is expected that the factory will generate around 10,000 jobs ,with an initial capacity of 2 million units a year and making it the largest scooter manufacturing facility in the world. This will serve as Ola’s global manufacturing hub catering to customers in India and across Europe, UK, Latin America and ANZ (Australia and New Zealand)

This factory is going to be aOla has simplified the process of cab booking. From easy payment options to keeping the passenger entertained on the go with 'Ola Play', Ola takes care of everything to ensure a smooth ride. Ola now also operates self-drive cars. Be it self-drive or cab hailing, Ola offers a wide range of cars to choose from depending on the number of travelers, budget, and convenience. For traveling within the city, one can hire shared taxis, autos, bikes, and even e-rickshaws through Ola.

One can opt for ‘Ola outstation’ to travel outside the city and ‘Ola rentals’ to rent a cab on an hourly basis. Ola has also launched ‘Ola select’, a subscription-based membership program that offers premium benefits on rides. 'Ola pedal', Ola’s bicycle-sharing service, is already a big hit in the IIT Kanpur and the IIT Madras campuses with over 500 cycles.

In 2016, Ola launched ‘Ola corporate’. When employees book their rides through Ola corporate, the fare is deducted from the company’s Ola corporate prepaid account. Hence, companies can easily track the travel expenses of their employees while ensuring their safety.

Ola also introduced Ola money. The products offered under Ola money are Ola money credit card, Ola money postpaid, Ola money mobile wallet, and Ola money hospicash. Ola hospicash is a collaboration between Ola and Religare health insurance that allows the policyholders to claim Rs. 5000 per day in case of hospitalization.

Ola operates with transparency. The commission is given to drivers for every sale made. Ola is known to charge far less than many other cab operators. With the acquisition of FoodPanda in December 2017, Ola also forayed into the cloud kitchen segment.

Ola launched India's first multimodal electric vehicle project on 26 May 2017. The project brought together industry experts and the Indian government to pioneer electric vehicles for the public and promote shared mobility in Nagpur. Ola is providing 200+ electric vehicles  for booking in Nagpur through its app. Established as a separate entity, Ola Electric Mobility Pvt. Ltd also reached the unicorn status with $250 million investment from SoftBank in July 2019.

Ola Electric raises $100 Mn in debt financing from the Bank of Baroda in what is declared as the largest long-term debt financing agreement in the Indian EV industry. These proceeds, as the company mentioned, will go towards the funding and financial closure of the first phase of development of the manufacturing factory of its electric two-wheelers, which is based out of Chennai.

According to OLA's December 2020 statement, the company had already announced that it would set up Phase 1 of the factory with investments amounting to Rs 2,400 crore.

The Ola Electric scooters have already started pre-bookings and have registered over 1 lakh pre-bookings. Now, the company is to finally launch them, as per Bhavish Aggarwal's new Twitter post, on August 15, 2021.mazing and technologically advanced with 5,000 robots stationed across various functions and will be built on Industry 4.o principles. Ola will have access to Siemens’ integrated Digital Twin design and manufacturing solutions to digitalize and validate product and production ahead of actual operations. It will have Ola’s proprietary AI Engine and tech stack deeply integrated into each aspect of the manufacturing process. Thereby, providing unprecedented control, automation and quality to the operations.

Ola founder Bhavish Aggarwal graduated from IIT Bombay with a B. Tech in computer science in the year 2008. Ola cabs owner Bhavish worked for Microsoft research in Bangalore for two years right after college. He filed 2 patents and published 3 research publications in international journals during his stint at Microsoft. While chasing his entrepreneurial dream, he started an online company to sell short duration tours and holidays before transforming it into Ola Cabs. Bhavish Aggarwal is now the CEO of Ola. Born on 28 August 1985, OLA owner Bhavish Aggarwal's age is just 35! His personal net worth was estimated to be around $350 Million as per 2019 data.

Ankit Bhati is the co-founder of Ola and heads the technical aspects of Ola Cabs, ensuring a quick, convenient, and instinctive experience for the customers and partners. He joined IIT Bombay in 2004 for a B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering and an M.Tech in CAD and automation. By 2009, he had already worked on several freelance projects and with startups like Wilcom, QED42, etc. Ankit finally decided to give up his nomadic professional life for his own start-up. He became part of the Ola Cabs journey in November 2010.