what is paypal?

paypal, American e-commerce company formed in March 2000 that specializes in Internet money transfers. It was heavily used by the Internet auction company eBay, which owned paypal from 2002 to 2015. paypal was the product of a merger between X.com and Confinity, and it allowed users to make payments on purchased goods or exchange money between accounts in a secure online transaction.

After watching paypal become the premier choice of Internet auction shoppers, online marketplace giant eBay acquired paypal for $1.5 billion in October 2002. The company offers users the ability to link their paypal accounts to their own bank accounts, making transfers and payments more efficient than money orders or checks. Fees are collected by eBay on certain transactions and are determined based on the amount of the transaction, the nature of the transaction, and the currency type of the transaction. In 2015 paypal was spun off into an independent company, but it continued to be used by eBay.

A sophisticated series of security advancements helped paypal remain a respected company in terms of identity theft prevention. The company implemented superior anti-phishing and anti-hacking measures, and it developed a portable “key” device that requires manual activation before a transfer from a paypal account is processed. paypal allows consumers to contest and request a refund in transactions where they have been misled or cheated. Additionally, paypal offers a type of limited protection for sellers and includes a system that deactivates accounts when suspicious or excessive activity is observed. 

As contrasted with the other two major forms of business ownership, the sole proprietorship and the partnership, the corporation is distinguished by a number of characteristics that make it a more-flexible instrument for large-scale economic activity, particularly for the purpose of raising large sums of capital for investment. Chief among these features are: (1) limited liability, meaning that capital suppliers are not subject to losses greater than the amount of their investment; (2) transferability of shares, whereby voting and other rights in the enterprise may be transferred readily from one investor to another without reconstituting the organization under law; (3) juridical personality, meaning that the corporation itself as a fictive “person” has legal standing and may thus sue and be sued, may make contracts, and may hold property in a common name; and (4) indefinite duration, whereby the life of the corporation may extend beyond the participation of any of its incorporators. The owners of the corpora

tion in a legal sense are the shareholders, who purchase with their investment of capital a share in the proceeds of the enterprise and who are nominally entitled to a measure of control over the financial management of the corporation.

The form of the modern business corporation originated in a fusion of the type of commercial association known as the joint-stock company, which was in fact a partnership, and the traditional legal form of the corporation as it had been developed for medieval guilds, municipalities, monasteries, and universities. Although business corporations were formed in England as early as the 16th century, these enterprises were monopolies chartered by the crown for the pursuit of strict mercantilist policies and were thus closer, in some respects, to the form of the modern public corporation than to that of the private business corporation.

The fusion of the two forms took place incrementally over the first two-thirds of the 19th century in Great Britain, the United States, France, and Germany with the passage of general incorporation laws, which gradually made incorporation a more or less routine matter for business enterprises. Particularly influential for this development in the United States was the fact that powers of incorporation were largely restricted to the individual states under the Constitution, which led in the late 19th century to competition between the states for liberalization of their respective incorporation laws. Given the freedom of interstate commerce guaranteed under the Constitution, would-be incorporators could choose the state in which they wished to incorporate without compromising their freedom to transact business in any other state.