What is puma?

Puma SE is engaged in footwear, apparel, and accessories business under the Puma and Cobra Golf brand names. Footwear is the company's leading category. Puma also licenses its brand name for fragrances, eyewear, and watches. Nearly a quarter of the company's sales are direct to consumers through Puma's retail stores, factory outlets, and online channels. The remaining sales are wholesale to Puma's retail partners. Most of the company's revenue is generated in the Americas; and Europe, Middle East, and Africa geographic segments.

Puma SE, branded as Puma, is a German multinational corporation that designs and manufactures athletic and casual footwear, apparel and accessories, which is headquartered in Herzogenaurach, Bavaria, Germany. Puma is the third largest sportswear manufacturer in the world. The company was founded in 1948 by Rudolf Dassler. In 1924, Rudolf and his brother Adolf Dassler had jointly formed the company Gebrüder Dassler Schuhfabrik Dassler Brothers Shoe Factory. The relationship between the two brothers deteriorated until the two agreed to split in 1948, forming two separate entities, Adidas and Puma. Both companies are currently based in Herzogenaurach, Germany.

Puma has been a public company since 1986, listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. French luxury group Kering (formerly known as Pinault-Printemps-Redoute or PPR) holds, Kering's largest shareholder Artemis SA owns of the share capital. Since 1 July 2013, the company has been led by former football professional Bjrn Gulden (chief executive officer).

As of 2017, Puma SE employs more than 13,000 people worldwide and distributes its products in more than 120 countries.

Following the split from his brother, Rudolf originally registered the newly established company as Ruda (derived from Rudolf Dassler, as Adidas was based on Adi Dassler), but later changed the name to Puma. Puma's earliest logo consisted of a square and beast jumping through a D, which was registered, along with the company's name, in 1948. Puma shoe and clothing designs feature the Puma logo and the distinctive which was introduced in 1958. Puma SE, branded as Puma, is a German multinational corporation that designs and manufactures athletic and casual footwear, apparel and accessories, which is headquartered in Herzogenaurach, Bavaria, Germany. Puma is the third largest sportswear manufacturer in the world.

PUMA has relentlessly pushed sport and culture forward by creating fast products for the world's fastest athletes. For more than 70 years, we draw strength and credibility from our heritage in sports. Puma is a great shoe brand because it provides comfort for those who have injured their feet. Puma shoes come in an array of styles such as sports shoes, basketball trainer shoes, and heavy-duty boots. years after founding their company, the Dassler brothers fell out and went separate ways. Rudolf Dassler moved into another building, which belonged to the family. Together with 14 employees, he transformed this storage facility into a factory and founded his own company

The Sportschuhfabrik Rudolf Dassler (RUDA) was registered as a business in January 1948, commencing operations a few months later on June 1, 1948. It took another four months until the PUMA brand was born: on October 1, 1948 PUMA was registered at the German Patent and Trademark Office. In December 1948, in a letter to partners and customers, Rudolf Dassler announced his decision to name the company PUMA Schuhfabrik Rudolf Dassler. The details of the new company were added to Germany’s commercial register on January 14, 1949. 

Even though he had to start from scratch, Rudolf Dassler’s success continued. PUMA’s first football boot, the ATOM, convinced many athletes of its qualities. Several members of West Germany’s national team wore this boot during the country’s first post war football match, a win against Switzerland in 1950. Among the players Herbert Burdenski, who scored the winning goal. From that moment on, the history of sports and the history of the company became inseparable.