what is reliance?

Mukesh ambani, in full Mukesh Dhirubhai ambani, (born April 19, 1957, Aden, Yemen), Yemeni-born Indian business mogul who is the chairman and managing director of the Indian conglomerate Reliance Industries Limited (RIL), the foremost company of the Indian energy and materials conglomerate Reliance Group.

ambani was one of four children of Dhirubhai ambani, who first worked as a gas-station attendant. Owing to the increasingly unstable political climate in Aden, the family relocated in 1958 to the Bhuleshwar neighbourhood of Bombay (now Mumbai), where they lived in a chawl (a communal building that commonly features low-rent two-room apartments). In the same year, Dhirubhai and a cousin founded the Reliance Commercial Corporation, which grew from a commodities-trading business that they initially operated out of a one-room rental space into RIL.

ambani earned a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from the University of Bombay (now the University of Mumbai) and subsequently pursued a master’s degree in business administration from Stanford University. However, he left the program in 1981 to join the family business, where he worked to diversify the company, venturing into a vast array of areas, including communications, infrastructure, petrochemicals, petroleum refining, polyester fibres, and gas and oil production. In 2004 he was named one of the world’s most respected business leaders by the professional-services firm PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Following Dhirubhai’s death in 2002, ambani and his brother, Anil, assumed joint leadership of the Reliance companies. However, feuds between the brothers over control prompted their mother, Kokilaben ambani, to split Reliance’s assets via a noncompetition agreement (2006–10) under which Mukesh assumed control of the gas, oil, and petrochemicals units as RIL under the umbrella of the Reliance Group. ambani has been credited with creating the globe’s largest start-up petroleum refinery as well as spearheading the creation of several state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities that vastly increased RIL’s production capabilities. In 2006 he was chosen to cochair the India Economic Summit of the World Economic Forum (WEF)—an international organization made up of some of the world’s prominent business leaders, politicians, policy makers, scholars, philanthropists, trade unionists, and representatives of nongovernmental organizations that convenes annually to discuss global commerce, economic development, political c

oncerns, and important social issues. The following year he became India’s first rupee trillionaire. In 2007 The Economic Times newspaper and the news agency Press Trust of India simultaneously named ambani the world’s richest man. The following year he created the Mumbai Indians, an Indian Premier League cricket team. In 2010 he was elected to serve as a member of the WEF Foundation Board. Dhirubhai ambani, in full Dhirajlal Hirachand ambani, (born December 28, 1932, Chorwad, Gujarat, British India—died July 6, 2002, Mumbai, India), Indian industrialist who was the founder of Reliance Industries, a giant petrochemicals, communications, power, and textiles conglomerate that was the biggest exporter in India and the first privately owned Indian company in the Fortune 500.

ambani was the third of five children born to a village schoolteacher and his wife, and he grew up in a family of modest means. At the age of 17, he migrated to the British colony of Aden to join his brother. He started his career as a clerk at A. Besse & Co., which in the 1950s was the largest transcontinental trading firm east of Suez. There he learned trading, accounting, and other business skills. In 1958 ambani returned to India and settled in Bombay (now Mumbai).

ambani began a business trading in spices in the late 1950s, calling his nascent venture Reliance Commercial Corporation. He soon expanded into other commodities, following a strategy of offering higher-quality products and accepting smaller profits than his competitors. His business grew quickly. After deciding that the corporation had gone as far as it could with commodities, ambani turned his attention to synthetic textiles. He made his first foray into backward integration with the opening of the first Reliance textile mill in 1966. Continuing a policy of backward integration and diversification, he gradually shaped Reliance into a petrochemicals behemoth and later added plastics and power generation to the company’s businesses.

In 1977 ambani took Reliance public after nationalized banks refused to finance him. His agility in navigating a stodgy economy and crippling government regulations and bureaucracy led to allegations of political manipulation, corruption, and engineered raids on competitors, but investor confidence in Reliance remained unshaken—owing in part to the handsome dividends the company offered, as well as the founder’s charisma and vision. ambani was credited with introducing the stock market to the average investor in India, and thousands attended the Reliance annual general meetings, which were sometimes held in a sports stadium, with many more watching on television.