What is skype?

Skype is a VoIP service that enables people to make and receive free voice and video calls over the internet using a computer, web browser, or mobile phone. VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) enables communication that goes around the standard methods of landlines and cellular plans.

Whether you're working from home or looking for a way to chat with others using video, Skype has broken traditional barriers to communication. Along with chatting with people in your in-app contacts, you can also use it to make international calls. If the person you're talking to also uses a Skype account, talking to them doesn't cost anything extra. For an extra charge, however, you can call and text your non-Skype contacts on their cellphones. Skype is a proprietary telecommunications application that specializes in providing VoIP-based videotelephony, videoconferencing and voice calls. It also has instant messaging, file transfer, debit-based calls to landline and mobile telephones, and other features. 

Skype is a free program that allows you to talk to friends and family on your computer or mobile device. You can even talk to each other live over video chat. All of this is possible through a technology called voiceover IP, or VoIP (pronounced voyp), which can transmit your voice over the Internet. Skype uses VoIP to let you make phone calls, video calls, group calls, and more over the Internet instead of using traditional phone lines. Many of Skype's most popular features, including voice calling, video calling, and instant messaging, are completely free to use. However, using Skype to call landlines or cell phones does cost money, ranging from a few cents per minute to several dollars per month. To learn more about pricing, visit Skype's Rates page. Skype is software that enables the world's conversations. Millions of individuals and businesses use Skype to make free video and voice one-to-one and group calls, send instant messages and share files with other people on Skype. You can use Skype on whatever w
orks best for you – on your mobile, computer or tablet.

Skype is free to download and easy to use.

If you pay a little, you can do more – like call phones and send SMS. You can pay as you go or buy a subscription, whatever works for you. And in the world of business, this means you can bring your entire ecosystem of workers, partners and customers together to get things done.

Try Skype today and start adding your friends, family and colleagues. They won’t be hard to find; hundreds of millions of people are already using Skype to do all sorts of things together. We will also briefly discuss some of the other features of Skype, including the mobile application and instant messaging,

which you can explore on your own as you become more comfortable using the software.

This booklet will serve as a guide as we progress through the class, but it can also be a valuable tool for when you are

working on your own. I encourage you to download Skype on your personal computer (if you have access to one) and

set-up your account soon after class. There will be additional computer classes in the near future, and I am available for

questions during Tech Times, usually held on Tuesdays from 10am-noon and Thursdays from 3pm-5pm. Feel free to call

us at 970-264-2209 to verify possible schedule changes. Skype is an easy-to-use program that is free to download and allows free video calls to anywhere in the world

when calling another Skype user. You can also call landlines and cell phones for a fee. It’s a great way to stay in

touch with family, friends, and colleagues around the world. In order to make full use of Skype, you will need an internet connection and a computer with a microphone

and web camera. Most new laptops and desktop monitors come with a camera built-in as well as an internal

microphone (located on the computer). If your computer is lacking either of these features, they can be

reasonably purchased (webcams for less than $50 and headsets with earphones and a microphone for less

than.) Even if your computer has an internal microphone, you may wish to purchase a headset for privacy

purposes. 

 