What Is Yahoo?
Everything you can do on Yahoo.com
by Tim Fisher
Updated on December 20, 2019
Tweet
Share
Email

AROUND THE WEB
Browsers
Cloud Services
Error Messages
Family Tech
Home Networking
5G
Antivirus
Around the Web
Yahoo is a web services provider. Launched in 1995, it's one of the oldest names on the internet and consistently one of the most popular websites. Yahoo offers services such as a web search engine and an email service.


At first glance, after visiting the site's home page, you might assume that it's just a portal for news. While you can absolutely get news from Yahoo, there's actually a lot more to the site, as we'll see below.

Yahoo
Yahoo is a backronym for "Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle." You can learn more about the name here.

Yahoo's List of Services
The best way to access all of Yahoo's web services in one place is via their Yahoo Everything page. Here are a few examples of what you can do from Yahoo's website:


Yahoo Answers: Ask questions and get answers from other users.
Yahoo Downloads: Extensions you can install to your browser to do things like access news on Yahoo each time you open your browser, view more of your inbox, make Yahoo your default search engine, and more.
Yahoo Entertainment: Movie showtimes, videos, and news specific to TV, movies, celebrities, and music.
Yahoo Fantasy Sports: Sports news, scores, rumors, fantasy games, and more.
Yahoo Finance: Stock market information, quotes, finance news, and more.
Yahoo Groups: Anyone can make a group that others can access and post in like a forum.
Yahoo Mail: A free email service where you can send and receive email messages.
My Yahoo: Customize Yahoo to make it your own personalize start page.
Yahoo News: The latest news from around the world and in the United States.
Yahoo Search: A web search engine where you can find websites, videos, images, recipes, and more.
Yahoo Shopping: Shop through Yahoo by browsing stores, brands, or categories like electronics, toys, sporting goods, flowers, gifts, clothing, and more.
Yahoo Weather: View the current weather and forecast where you are and around the world.

Some of Yahoo's other services include Yahoo Developer Network, Yahoo Lifestyle, Yahoo Small Business, and Yahoo Sports. Yahoo used to offer other services that are now discontinued, such as Yahoo Messenger, Yahoo People Search, and Yahoo 360.


Open Yahoo World to view Yahoo's international links. It's there that you can visit Yahoo in various languages like German, French, Spanish, Italian, English, etc.

Yahoo Search Tips
The Yahoo web search engine is one of its most popular tools. Accessible from search.yahoo.com, the home page is extremely simple, but there are some things to note after starting a search.

For example, it might not seem obvious at first how to use Yahoo to find images or videos. One way to do it is to first start a web search. After seeing the results, you can switch over to Images or Videos for those results.

This is also one way to use Yahoo Search for finding news, recipes, and other things supported by the search engine (open the More menu if you don't see what it is you want to search for).

When you run a search from the Yahoo Search home page and then access a different part of the tool (such as News, Recipes, etc.), you might be redirected to a totally different search engine for that purpose.

For example, you can use the yahoo.com or search.yahoo.com web page to search for a definition, or you can do it directly from the Yahoo Dictionary Search page.

Websites Like Yahoo
Yahoo isn't the only website of its kind. Google is extremely similar because it also offers a variety of free services that spawn from the same company, like Google Search, Gmail, Google News, a finance search tool, built-in shopping results, etc.

Yandex follows these same lines; there's an email account you can get, a way to find directions on a map, and a search engine for finding images, web pages, and videos.

There are also other web search engines like DuckDuckGo, Bing, and Dogpile. Yahoo Mail is also just one of many free email providers